Library for OLM operator-inspect functionality (#177)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/olm/operator-must-gather.md

---
title: operator-must-gather
authors:
  - "@shawn-hurley"
reviewers:
  - "@ecordell"
  - "@njhale"
approvers:
  - "@ecordell"
  - "@njhale"
creation-date: 2020-1-6
last-updated: 2020-1-6
status: implementable
see-also:
  - "./enhancements/must-gather.md"
  - "./enhancements/oc/inspect.md"
---

# Operator Must Gather

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Open Questions [optional]

## Summary

> Components developing [must gather images]("../oc/must-gather.md#must-gather-images") to gather all the information that they will need for debugging has become the defacto mechanism for customers to father information for a support case. When debugging installation of an operator with OLM we need to gather data from objects across the cluster. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Components developing [must gather images]("../oc/must-gather.md#must-gather-images") to gather all the information that they will need for debugging has become the defacto mechanism for customers to gather information for a support case. When debugging installation of an operator with OLM we need to gather data from objects across the cluster. 
```

## Motivation

> Today back and forth between the customer and the operator team or the OLM team to get info about an operator failing install. This the current state or each operator needs to write their own must gather to capture everything. Operator authors should have a starting point for writing their own must gathers such that gathering the OLM information for their operator should be consistent. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, there is back and forth between the customer and the operator team or the OLM team to get info about an operator failing install. Operator authors should have a starting point for writing their own must gathers such that gathering the OLM information for their operator will be consistent. 
```

### Goals

> List the specific goals of the proposal. How will we know that this has succeeded?

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> 1. Gathering should gather exactly the operator, and relatedObjects for that operator, and the resources created by OLM.

Reviewer: It's a little unclear to me how related objects fit in.

Will this include a change to OLM so that subscription.status contains relatedObjects? Or this is saying that the olm must-gather image will collect OLM stuff by default, and users should run `oc inspect` to collect the operator-specific data from "custom" relatedObjects?

Author: it was a leftover line. removing it

2. A library that can be used to enable this functionality across multiple commands.
3. A small set of user facing CLI flags. 

> 4. Integaration in a seperate must-gather image for other operator authors, or via the library should

Reviewer: Should what?

5. Should be 100% functional when not in a openshift environment.

### Non-Goals

1. Anything related to the wider cluster. This is not meant to be a OCP debug tool.
2. Specficics for a given operator. This is meant to help debug install of the operator, not the operator's functionality. 
3. Handle low level install scenarios, such as manually creating a CSV after applying RBAC.

## Proposal

> A library, in the [api](https://github.com/operator-framework/api/tree/master/pkg) repo that will be vendored by `OLM` and `operator-sdk`. This library will include all of the traversal logic for retrieving OLM Operators data. 

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure this is the right place, but my opinion will be based on what changes would be required in `https://github.com/operator-framework/api/blob/master/go.mod`

(we want the api types to be importable in as many places as possible)

Author: that sounds like a plan if we end up bringing in to many dependencies then we can re-evaluate the location.

The library will include a set of pflags that can be used by commands to create the options structure.

> OLM will create a must-gather image and productize it. Allowing customers to run this must gather when needed.

Reviewer: Upstream or downstream?

Will it be part of the ocp release payload?

Author: Yes, it should be apart of the release payload, so that disconnected users would get the image and could run it.

I think we can come back to if an upstream image makes sense. Let's assume this is a downstream only image for now?

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

#### Constraints
This enhancement is only meant for operators that are deployed by OLM. The entrypoint should be the `subscription`.

### Risks and Mitigations
- No environment variables will be outputed from a pod.
- We will not save any secret data that may have been created. 

## Design Details
* Considering that many different CLI's will be interacting with the library, the library will create an interface that the CLI's will need to implement to write files to disk.
* The library will have a default version of this interface internally

```
type ObjectWriter interface {
  // object is the object to be written. The implmenter can choose the output format.
  // file is the relative path, from the starting directory of the inspect command, for the object.

>   Write(object interface{}, file string) error

Reviewer: Why not just have an `io.Writer` (or some appropriate variant)? is it critical that consumers specify a filesystem path?

  // Used to determine if the root directory to be used by the library is valid.

>   IsDirViable(dir string) error

Reviewer: This seems unrelated to the writer interface - I would probably make two interfaces that can be implemented by consumers.

Author: +1 this was leftover from the inspect integration

}
```

* The library options will allow for the implmenter to control what is searched and how

```type OperatorInspectConfig struct {
       // A kubeconfig to be used to contact the cluster
       Kubeconfig *rest.Config
       // PackageName used to filter to a particular operator by it's package name. If empty all packages will be used.
       PackageName string
       // Namespace to look for subscription objects
       // if left blank, will search the entire cluster for subscription.
       Namespace   string
       Writer ObjectWriter
}
```

* A Inspector interface will be returned
```
type Inspector interface {
  Inspect() error
}

// Will return the inspector that can be used for insepcting operators from OLM.
func New(configArgs ...InspectorArg) (Inspector, error)
```

The Inspector interface will be responsible for gather the following resource types:
1. Subscription 
2. InstallPlan
3. Resources created from the install plan (CSV's, RBAC, CRD)
4. Operator Deployment created by CSV

### Test Plan

> - an e2e test will be used to validate that the command can:

Reviewer: I think it will be easier to test if the fs is optional via a writer you pass in (tests can be written that just write to a buffer)
